---
marp: true
size: 16:9 
paginate: true
#footer: Week 01.01
---

# GEOG 491/891: Special Topics - Spatial Analysis in R

## 

## Week 01.01: Introduction

### Dr. Bitterman

## 

---

# Today's schedule

- Open discussion
- Course welcome
- Introductions
- R basics and practice

---

## Anything to discuss? Questions?

---

# My approach to this course

- Geography matters
- Concepts and independent thinking are important, trivia is not (or at least not always)
- It’s important to solve problems or complete tasks, but understanding HOW you do so is more important

---

# Class introductions

Pair up (with appropriate distance) – and don’t leave anyone behind

Share:
- Name
- Where you’re from
- Major/program, year
- Why are you taking this course? Why are you in your major? Why UNL?
- Previous GIS experience
- Previous programming experience, R experience?
- Imagine it’s December 2021 – what would make you feel like you were successful in this course?


---

# My introduction

- Dr. Patrick Bitterman
- Independence, IA -> UIowa -> UVM -> UNL
- Assistant Professor in Geography Program, SGIS, 3rd year
- Goals: teach a successful course, build my research program, get my sense of smell/taste back
- GIS experience? Programming experience? Extensive, but I don’t use ArcGIS much…
- Success in this course: 
  - students reach *their* learning objectives
  - students are able to use R to make their work faster and more consistent
  - students improve methods related to their other research or career interests
  - students develop and appreciation (and dareisay, love?) for programmatic spatial analysis

---

# Time to share

- Present your partner to the class
- Who wants to go first?

**Share:**
- Name
- Where you’re from
- Major/program, year
- Why are you taking this course? Why are you in your major? Why UNL?
- Previous GIS experience
- Previous programming experience, R experience?
- Imagine it’s December 2021 – what would make you feel like you were successful in this course?

---

# Course basics

---

# Instructor (me)

- Dr. Patrick Bitterman
- Geography Program, in School of Global Integrative Studies

- Office: 932 Oldfather Hall
- Office hours: M 12:30 – 2pm, or by appointment (also Zoom)
- Email: patrick.bitterman@unl.edu


---

# Materials

- Brundson, C., Comber, L. 2019. An Introduction to R for Spatial Analysis and Mapping (Spatial Analytics and GIS). SAGE. https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/an-introduction-to-r-for-spatial-analysis-and-mapping/book258267

- Optional: Wickham, H. 2017. R for Data Science: Import, Tidy, Transform, Visualize, and Model Data. O’Reilly Media. (if you are unfamiliar with R or other programming language) (https://r4ds.had.co.nz/index.html)

---

# Learning objectives

By the end of the term, students will be able to successfully:

- Demonstrate a familiarity with the R programming language in the context of geospatial analysis
- Write self-contained functions to automate geospatial tasks
- Analyze model workflows and describe computer code and algorithms in plain language
- Create small-scale programs that interface with web-based tools
- Practice good programming practices
- Plan, develop, and execute a programmatic analysis of a dataset

---

# Course policies

Assignment submission:
- All assignments due on their due date
- All assignments will be posted on Canvas, but turned in via GitHub (we'll talk mroe)
- Late items will be accepted, but will be penalized 20% of the potential points for each day they are late
- All changes to the syllabus will be communicated via Canvas announcement
- Students are expected to attend all class meetings, but attendance is not graded


---

# Collaboration

- Feel free to discuss labs, etc. with your classmates
- However…
  - All lab reports, papers, and other work should be your own, individual thoughts
  - Students who do not follow these policies will be reported to the College for academic dishonesty


---

# Other tips

- Read relevant materials before class
- Attend class – understanding theory and concepts will help you with practical applications
- If there are topics, news stories, blog posts, tweets, etc. that you find interesting or want to know more about, let me know
- Before you start coding, think through the process and sketch out the workflow. This is called *pseudocode*
- Labs build on each other, so don’t get behind
- Take advantage of office hours
- Do not leave assignments until the last minute
- Have fun!


---

# Assessment

- Lab assignments
- 5 labs, 2-3 weeks to complete each one
- Final project
  - Proposal
  - Update presentation (in-class)
  - Final presentation (in-class)
  - Final paper
- Participation

---

# Gradaute students

For those students enrolled in GEOG 891, the requirements of the final project will be expanded to include: 

1) an additional 3-4 pages in your report
2) code documentation
3) an additional 5 minutes in your final presentation to the class. 
4) required to produce a cover page for your GitHub page/portfolio

---

# Course format

- Project-based
- Student-led
  - I am not going to recap the readings (much)
  - You are expected to be ready to participate in discussion
  - We will spend most of our time doing, not lecturing

- Mondays and Wednesdays: discussion, examples, and activities
- Fridays: wildcard day (coding challenges, group work, seminar)

---

# Course inspiration and source material

- My own experience
- Your textbook
- Lovelace, R. *Geocomputation with R* https://geocompr.robinlovelace.net/index.html

---

# University policies

- Learning accommodations
  - Contact Services for Students with Disabilities
  - Let me know
- Academic integrity
  - Don’t cheat
  - Don’t plagiarize 
- Health and safety
  - Counseling and Psychological & Services (CAPS)
  - Big Red Resilience & Well-being

---

# COVID Policies

- Pass the screening at the door (get tested, show your status)
- Take care of yourself
- If you don’t feel well, don’t come to class
- Take care of others
- Be respectful

## It's time to talk about masks...

---

# Let's talk coding

---

# Your homework for today

(setup your computing environment, review chapters 1-4 in *R for Data Science*, come to class with 2 questions about R, geospatial programming in general, or this course)

### Find a *different* buddy

- Share:
  - How you found the setup process to go (e.g., did you run into any issues?)
  - What you thought of Chapters 1-4
  - Your questions 

### Report out (to the whiteboard!!!)

---

# Bringing everyone along together

- One of our challenges in this kind of course
- Spatial analysis is not programming...
- ...and programming is not spatial analysis

---

# SA and Programming in R

- Experience? In what setting?
- Experience with a version control system (e.g., git)?
- What about experience with spatial analysis, GIS?

---

# If we have time...

1. Open RStudio
2. Create a new project in a temporary working directory (it can be anywhere)
3. Let's talk about packages... (install **tidyverse**)
4. Assignment: "<-" vs. "="
5. ...and familiarize ourselves with the interface

---

# Review and next class

- Any questions on course policies?
- On anything else?
- This week’s readings/tasks: 
  - Chapter 1 in textbook
  - Review Hadley's book/site
  - Practice on your own
- Next session: basics of R and GIScience

