---
marp: true
size: 16:9 
paginate: true
#footer: Week 05.02
---

# GEOG 491/891: Special Topics - Spatial Analysis in R

## 

## Week 05.02: more spatial functions and oddities

### Dr. Bitterman

## 

---

# Today's schedule

- Open discussion
- Some more basic spatial operations
- Activity

---

## Anything to discuss? Questions?

---

# This week is SUPPOSED to be "point pattern analysis", but we're going to be flexible 

### (Chapters 5 & 6 are extensive)

### This week's focus: simple geospatial operations and getting comfortable with them

---

- Continue from your datasets from last time

# today's setup

```r
library(tidyverse)
library(sf)
library(GISTools)
library(tmap)

# data:
streams <- sf::read_sf("./data/Streams_303_d_.shp")
counties <- sf::read_sf("./data/County_Boundaries-_Census.shp")
parks <- sf::read_sf("./data/State_Park_Locations.shp")

lc <- counties %>% dplyr::filter(., NAME10 == "Lancaster")
lc_303ds <- sf::st_intersection(streams, lc)
lc_parks <- sf::st_intersection(parks, lc)
```


---

# Intersection vs. a clip

### What's the difference?

---

# We used sf::st_intersection as an example:

```r
lc_303ds <- sf::st_intersection(streams, lc)
```

### Your book offers an alternative shortcut:

```r
allegedly.a.clip <- streams[lc,]
```
### this is supposed to be a "clip", but it is NOT (as of 2021-09-21)

### How might you know?

---

# What does this discrepancy tell us about our methods?

---

# Your book also provides some useful functions as part of the `GISTools` package

```r
poly.areas(counties)
```
### What happened?

---

# Beware mixing and matching data types

```r
counties %>% as_Spatial() %>% poly.areas()
```
### But might there be problems with this as well?


---

# Always know your projection

### (who can remind me what a projection is...)


---
# `sf` uses "well known text" (WKT) to def. projections

(see: https://epsg.io)

### reproject the data, or in `sf` parlance, "transform" it
```r
parks_p <- sf::st_transform(parks, 26914)
counties_p <- sf::st_transform(counties, 26914)
```

### then calculate areas

```r
counties %>% as_Spatial() %>% poly.areas()
# or
counties %>% sf::st_transform(., 26914) %>% sf::st_area()
```

### How would you calculate the difference in area due to a projection? why/when might it matter?

---

# it matters in distance calculations as well


### Who wants to breakdown this code?
```r
lc_303ds_p <- sf::st_transform(lc_303ds, 26914)
lc_parks_p <- sf::st_transform(lc_parks, 26914)

sf::st_distance(lc_303ds_p, lc_parks_p)
```
### What's the output?

---

# Your final task

### Today's task

- Calculate the distance betwen parks and 303d streams in Lancaster County
- Then, calculate the *difference* between projected and unprojected distances
- Then, make a histogram of those differences (better termed "errors")


### If you have time, continue from Monday

- find all of the state parks within 0.5 miles of a 303d stream
- plot just those points WITH the corresponding stream segment
- use color to distinguish the points and stream segments

## GO!

---

## For this week

- Chapters 5 & 6
- Practice, practice, practice
- Lab 01 due

